JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: As
the Republican plan to reform
health care struggles to find
its course, we explore
where it stands and what's
at stake for patients.
And our new "PBS
NewsHour"/NPR/Marist
poll finds most Americans
believe civility is getting
worse.
Tamara Keith and Stu Rothenberg
take a look at that and the
week ahead on Politics Monday.
Then, fixing club foot in
India -- how a nonsurgical
treatment for the common
birth defect is giving
mobility back to sufferers
in developing countries.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: That
treatment was developed
by an orthopedic surgeon
named Ignacio Ponseti
half-a-world away here in
Iowa, and half-a-century ago.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Spending fights
in states across the country
are heating up over this long
Fourth of July holiday
period, and none hotter
than in New Jersey.
This was day three of a
state government shutdown
with Republican Governor
Chris Christie and
Democratic lawmakers at
odds over the annual budget.
Christie was being criticized
Sunday for using the governor's
official residence at one of
New Jersey's public beaches that
are now closed to the public.
MARY BRITT, New Jersey
Resident: He has a place to go.
So as long as he can go and his
family can have a good holiday,
I guess that's more important
than the people of New Jersey.
It's very sad.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Christie
dismissed the criticism
today in a phone call
to a morning TV show.
Asked about people being upset,
he said, "Well, I'm sorry
they're not the governor."
Meanwhile, Maine's state
government is also partially
shut down over a budget fight.
And lawmakers in Illinois are
back in session, trying to
resolve a budget standoff that's
now in its third year.
President Trump shows no signs
of backing off his public
feud with the news media.
He tweeted criticism today
of the media, claiming
that news organizations
are not covering his
administration's successes.
The president drew new criticism
on Sunday after he tweeted
mock video of him tackling
a man with a CNN
logo over his face.
China's President Xi Jinping
warned President Trump today
that U.S.-China relations are
being harmed by a series
of problems initiated
by the United States.
They include a new U.S. arms
deal with Taiwan and American
sanctions against a Chinese bank
for its dealings
with North Korea.
Chinese state TV gave Beijing's
assessment of the call.
WOMAN (through translator):
Xi Jinping stressed
to Mr. President Trump
that since our meeting
at the Mar-a-Lago resort,
U.S.-China relations
achieved important results.
At the same time, the
relationship between
both countries has been
impacted by some negative
factors.
We hope the U.S. can act
earnestly in accordance with
the one-China principle.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The phone call
also came hours after the
destroyer USS Stethem, seen here
last summer, again sailed
near a disputed island
in the South China Sea.
Iraqi army units in Mosul
closed in today on the last
sliver of the city still held
by a few hundred
Islamic State fighters.
The government troops were
backed by heavy airstrikes
by the U.S. coalition.
ISIS fought back with
female suicide bombers
in Mosul and elsewhere.
They killed at least 15
people in the last 24 hours.
One of bombers was
just 15 years old.
In Germany, 18 people were
killed when a bus full of senior
citizens crashed this morning.
Police say the bus rear-ended
a semi-truck in Bavaria,
and then burst into flames.
Nearly 200 emergency workers
joined the response and tried to
recover bodies from the charred
wreckage.
Authorities say the heat from
the fire was so intense, only
the bus' twisted frame was
left.
Back in this country, automakers
posted another poor showing
for June, with sales numbers
tumbling for the
sixth straight month.
Fiat Chrysler fell more than
7 percent, while Ford and GM
were down roughly 5 percent.
Meanwhile, Korean
automaker Hyundai posted
a 19 percent loss.
Analysts say a downturn
was expected after last
year's record sales numbers.
Wall Street cut short its
trading day, ahead of the Fourth
of July, but banks and energy
companies made the most of it.
They led the Dow Jones
industrial average
higher, adding 129
points to close at 21479.
The Nasdaq fell 30 points,
and the S&P 500 gained five.
And on the eve of the Fourth
of July, there's new evidence
that Americans need to brush
up on their history.
In a "NewsHour"/NPR/Marist
poll, only 77 percent
correctly said the United
States won independence
from Britain.
The rest were unsure or named
another country, including
Russia and Afghanistan.
Even fewer, only 69 percent,
knew that the American colonies
declared their independence
in the year 1776.
Got to work on that.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the March of Dimes president
on replacing Obamacare;
a new report highlighting
the broad reach of the opioid
epidemic; are Americans less
civil since President
Trump took office?
- - a "NewsHour" poll
offers clues; and much more.
As Republicans in Congress
struggle to reach agreement on
a plan to replace the Affordable
Care Act, we have heard from a
variety of interested parties
in recent weeks and months.
They have included
hospitals, the pharmaceutical
industry, advocates for
the homeless and those
with disabilities, as
well as lawmakers from
both political parties.
Tonight, we turn to the
March of Dimes and its
president, Stacey Stewart.
It's a nonprofit that focuses
on the health needs of mothers
and babies, especially with
regard to preventing
premature birth, birth
defects and infant mortality.
Stacey Stewart, thank you
very much for being here.
So, what is your main concern
with the Senate version of
this health care reform plan?
STACEY STEWART, President,
March of Dimes: Well, the March
of Dimes, as you mentioned,
what we care about is
the health of pregnant
women and their babies.
And our main concern with the
Senate bill, as it's proposed,
is that it would put at
risk the health of many of
those women and their babies.
Medicaid today covers about half
of all pregnancies in the United
States and there are about 30
million children that
are covered by Medicaid.
Under what the Senate
has proposed, about
6.5 million low-income
women of child-bearing
age would lose their
coverage under Medicaid.
And we think that that puts
at risk those women in terms
of them being able to access
prenatal care and all the
things they need to do to have
a healthy baby, have a healthy
pregnancy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, about half
of pregnant women in this
country depend on government
help in order to have
a healthy pregnancy?
STACEY STEWART: Right.
So, what Medicaid covers
is -- it generally covers
a lot of low-income
women who are pregnant
and making sure they have the
help they need in prenatal
care and also in delivering the
baby.
But what it also covers, and
what a lot of people don't
understand, is that, if a baby
is born too soon, born
premature, if a baby
is born with low birth
weight or a baby has
defects, Medicaid also covers
many of those babies as well.
So it ends up covering a lot
of the babies and providing
the support that many women
and families need to
make sure they can have
a healthy pregnancy and
have the support that
babies need if there
are complications.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I think there
hasn't been a great deal of
talk about prevention, but you
were telling us that
prevention is a very -
- is a big part of this.
STACEY STEWART: Well, I think
one of the big conversations
that is going on right now is,
how do we stabilize
the health market?
And I think -- how do
we stabilize Medicaid
and I think stabilize
health care in general?
And I think one of the
conversations we really
need to have as a country
is, how do we begin
to do even more, to put more
of the emphasis on prevention
and care earlier on, vs. having
a system that really is
funding a lot of chronic
disease and illness?
So, one of the reasons we focus
so much on maternity coverage
and prenatal care is because
that's what happens to
enable those women to
have healthy babies.
If they get the help they
need, and certainly even before
they get pregnant, if they are
healthy before they even get
pregnant, that is going to be
what creates the best outcome
for that baby.
And so healthy women
equals healthy babies.
The more and more we
can put more emphasis
on early prevention
efforts and fund a system
that actually focuses on that,
we think will improve health
outcomes, reduce cost, reduce
premiums, which is what
I think everybody wants.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Isn't it
the case, though, Stacey
Stewart, that, under
traditional Medicaid,
states are required to cover
pregnancy, to cover prenatal
care, to cover babies?
So, even if Medicaid is scaled
back, which looks like would
be the case under the Senate
plan, the Republican plan, they
would still be required to cover
women in these circumstances,
wouldn't they?
STACEY STEWART: Well,
the problem is, is
that with reductions as
they're proposed, we're
not exactly sure if -- how much
of the need would be covered.
That's always a question.
And with women coming off of
Medicaid coverage as a result
of the pullback of the expansion
of Medicaid, I think there is
a real concern that we have.
And, of course, the
concern isn't just in
the Medicaid market.
The concern is also
in the private market.
So, what a lot of people
don't realize is, before
the Affordable Care
Act, private health
care plans didn't necessarily
include maternity coverage
as a requirement, as
did employer-based
plans or Medicaid.
And so we have got to look
at the totality of the health
care system in making sure that
all women, irrespective of
them being in a private plan or
Medicaid, have access to those
resources they need.
And we believe that much
of the support that women
need could be at risk.
And that's what our
primary concern is.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you answer
the argument from conservatives
that, look, something has
got to be done, that Medicaid
has grown at a rate that's
just out of control, cannot
be sustained, and unless some
methods are found to scale
that back, Medicaid is not
going to be there in the long
term for people who need it?
STACEY STEWART: Well,
we share that concern.
Obviously, the costs of
Medicaid are exorbitant
and they're growing.
But let's look at what's really
going on in the Medicaid market.
You have got a lot of low-income
women, many women of color.
And what we see are health
outcomes not improving.
One of the big concerns that
we have at the March of Dimes
is we just -- the government
just issued some statistics
showing that pre-term
birth rates have now
increased for the second
time in the past two years,
after some decline over
the past seven years.
Health outcomes are not
improving for pregnant
mothers and babies.
It's actually going down.
And so, one of the things that
we can do to control the costs
of Medicaid and health care
in general, again, is to focus
on what all early interventions
can be put in place, what
prevention methods could be
put in place to educate and
inform and provide the support
and the health care coverage
that women need, so that both
kind of health outcomes can be
avoided.
If we can avoid those health
outcomes, then we can avoid the
cost in the system, and then
we can keep those costs under
control, so that we have a
much more manageable system
over time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We have heard
on occasion from Republicans
the argument, why should men,
especially single men, be
required to buy - - to have
coverage that includes maternity
and birth costs?
STACEY STEWART: Well, that
argument just goes against
what insurance is all about.
We all buy insurance
for things we -- that
may never happen to us.
We all buy insurance for a lot
of things, including health
insurance for health outcomes
that we may never suffer from.
And the fact that women
are responsible for
child-bearing does not mean
that they're responsible
for creating the baby in the
first place by themselves.
It takes men and women
together to create babies.
And so we believe it's very
important that the insurance
market cover those things that
are risks that each one of us
individually may not experience,
but they are risks and
there are costs that are in
the system that are important
to make sure get covered.
So I think it's really important
to say, look, when we buy
insurance, we buy it for a lot
of things that we personally may
not experience or be impacted
by, but that's the point of
having insurance and that's the
point of having a larger pool
of risk included in insurance,
so that it reduces the cost
for everyone to participate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stacey Stewart,
the president of the March
of Dimes, and the debate goes
on.
Thank you.
STACEY STEWART: Thank
you so much, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: A new study
by one of the nation's biggest
health insurance companies
provides a startling
look at the toll that
prescription opioids are
taking on its policy-holders.
William Brangham has that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The insurance
giant Blue Cross Blue Shield
analyzed medical records
for 30 million of its customers.
And it found some
striking results.
In 2015, roughly 20 percent of
their customers, one in five,
filled at least one prescription
for opioid painkillers.
Almost half of those patients
were prescribed high doses of
those drugs, which are more
likely to cause dependence.
And, indeed, between 2010 and
2016, the rate of abuse or
addiction to those painkillers
shot up dramatically by almost
500 percent, this while the
rate of medically assisted
treatment, considered the
most successful way to curb
those addictions, grew by just
65 percent in the
same time frame.
The report also detailed
differences in opioid
abuse between men and
women and among different
parts of the country.
For more on this, I'm joined
now by Dr. Trent Haywood.
He's the chief medical
officer for the Blue Cross
Blue Shield Association.
Welcome to the "NewsHour."
This is a very, very interesting
set of data that you have
produced from your patients'
records.
We have said one in five have
had a prescription for these
painkillers, obviously, most of
them for very legitimate
pain-suppression needs.
But we have also discovered
here that the rate of
addiction has shot up.
Why do you think that
has been happening?
DR.
TRENT HAYWOOD, Chief Medical
Officer, Blue Cross Blue Shield
Association: Well, one of
the things, the reason
why we wanted to focus
on this particular
issue is just what you
just alluded to, the escalation
in the opioid addiction from
physicians prescribing these
particular opioids.
Starting in the '90s, we really
went aggressive as physicians
making sure that we address
pain.
Unfortunately, it was found out
later, as we are starting to see
unfold now, we underestimated
the risk related to that
particular high doses
of prescribing those
particular opioids.
And now we are suffering
the consequences of that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Some of this
data that you guys have put
together, it is not necessarily
new news.
Why hasn't the message seemingly
gotten out to the medical
community just how serious
these drugs really are?
DR.
TRENT HAYWOOD: Well, one of
the things that we know when
it comes to medicine and the
practice of medicine is that it
really requires a substantial
amount of time for it to change.
We're headed into the
independence holiday,
and so people are
moving off to make sure
that they enjoy times with
their friends and family, but
as this report highlights, all
of us won't necessarily be
independent this particular
day, because whether it be your
family, whether it be your
neighbor's family or whether it
be someone down the block, we're
all struggling with this
issue of opioid addiction.
Over two million Americans
each year are suffering
from this opioid addiction.
And what is key about that
particular aspect is that it's
not one specific demographic.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The
treatments, the best-known
treatments for these
addictions have barely
kept up with the pace.
Why do you think that is?
DR.
TRENT HAYWOOD: We're talking
about someone moving from what
would normally would be an
acute situation to
a chronic condition.
And so this opioid addiction
is a chronic condition and
we need to treat it that way.
We need to make certain
these people are not
only in treatment, but
they have the necessary
support for the chronic
condition that they have.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: If I am a
policy holder of Blue Cross
Blue Shield and I recognize
that I have a substance problem,
and I come and I try to get
treatment for that, will
my policy cover that
addiction treatment?
DR.
TRENT HAYWOOD: Yes.
So, one of the reasons why we're
highlighting this is because
you -- actually make certain
that you follow up at
your local plan level
to get that treatment.
So, this is something that
is actually covered in
most members' policies.
And so you absolutely
should be following up
to get that treatment.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: One of the
things I was also struck by
in your report is the gender
differences.
It seemed that younger -- when
the genders are younger, when
men and women are younger,
men seem to be more vulnerable.
But as we age, women
seem to become more
vulnerable to addiction.
Do you have a sense
of why that is?
DR.
TRENT HAYWOOD: One of the
reasons why we think women are
being impacted as we get into an
older age group is the fact that
they're appropriately following
up with their physicians.
If you think about it, the
more that you are following
up, the more likely that you're
going to be
prescribed an opioid.
And so we're seeing women are
actually at an accelerated
pace the more that we get into
the older age groups.
And so that's the correlation
that you're seeing, why women
would necessarily be higher,
because they are more
predisposed to actually
getting that prescribed opioid.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: At the very
moment we're talking, the
Senate is debating a health care
bill that could eliminate
hundreds of billions of
dollars from Medicaid.
Medicaid itself pays for
much of addiction treatment
around the country.
Do you share concern of many
that, if this bill were to
become law, that this -- those
cuts to Medicaid
could only worsen an
already awful epidemic?
DR.
TRENT HAYWOOD: From every
indication, this particular
issue is not partisan at all.
So, whether you're on the
right or on the left, what we
have understood is, as relates
to the opioid epidemic, both
sides of the aisle are eager
to be able to address that
particular concern.
And so, while there may
be broader implications
as it relates to health
care reform, on this
particular topic, I think we
all stand together as Americans.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All
right, Dr. Trent Haywood,
chief medical officer of
Blue Cross Blue Shield,
thank you so much.
DR.
TRENT HAYWOOD: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Coming up on
the "NewsHour": bringing hope
to children with a treatable
birth defect in India; how
one undocumented family in
Wisconsin has chosen to come out
of the shadows; and from
our "NewsHour" bookshelf, a
retelling of a Greek tragedy.
But first, we examine the
results from our latest "PBS
NewsHour"/NPR/Marist poll, the
president's continued attacks
against the media, and the
battle over health care on
Capitol Hill.
It's time for Politics Monday
with Tamara Keith of NPR and
Stu Rothenberg, senior editor
at Inside Elections.
And welcome to you both on this
day before the Fourth of July.
Thank you for wearing
red, white and blue.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Tam, the
White House is saying they
fully respect that some version
of a reform plan that the
Republicans like is going to
pass the Senate, going to pass
Congress.
What does your
reporting tell you?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: It's possible, though,
at the moment, Mitch McConnell
has described the effort to
find a health care bill that
50 Republicans can support
in the Senate as like
working with a Rubik's Cube.
Like, you move one piece,
and then some other piece
moves out of the way.
It's a very delicate negotiation
that's happening right now.
It's not clear that
they will get there.
Some of the Medicaid tests
that were just discussed in
the last segment are a hangup.
There are other hangups for
more conservative Republicans.
But they are highly motivated
to get to a win, and so you
can't discount the motivation
that exists to find a way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stu, I think I
have you asked this question
before, so what is the calculus?
And if you're a Senate
Republican, what
are you thinking?
STUART ROTHENBERG, Inside
Elections: Yes, I think the
choice is not passing anything,
or passing something
that's going to be broadly
unpopular, but is going
to find a lot of support
from within Republican
and conservative circles.
That's the choice.
And for most Republicans,
I think for most
Republicans strategists,
campaign strategists,
passing something is
a strong imperative.
It's , you have to do
something for the base,
even if you risk alienating
the larger electorate.
For individual members, that
has different equations.
For somebody like Lisa Murkowski
in Alaska, Susan Collins,
Rand Paul, Rob Portman, they
have their own considerations,
ideological or state-based.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But it
still looks, Tam, like
it's really hard to square
the circle or circle
the square.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, at this
point, it does look that
way, but you know what?
It kind of looked that
way in the House, too.
It looked like it was
a dead bill, so we were
calling it a zombie bill.
And then next thing you
knew, boom, they passed it.
They came up with a compromise
that didn't seem to materially
change anything, and yet
it passed, and they were able
to move it over to the Senate.
And so, you know, don't
declare this thing dead.
It could be back.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So maybe,
Stu, where there's a
will, there's a way.
STUART ROTHENBERG: And where
there's a Mitch McConnell,
there's always a possibility.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, so
let's talk about something
else, and that is, Tam, back to
the president's tweets.
He's tweeted I guess a couple
of times about health care,
but he's tweeted a number of
times about the news media.
Last week, it was the
cable show hosts Mika
Brzezinski, Joe Scarborough.
But yesterday there was this new
tweet where it was sort of an
edited video of the president
pummeling a man on the
ground, we're showing it
here, with CNN over his face.
How do we interpret this?
TAMARA KEITH: There are
many ways to interpret it,
but, you know, President
Trump, as a candidate
and now as a president,
to use the wrestling
analogy, he wanted a heel.
He needs a heel.
He needs a foe.
And, you know, he has
decided that the media is
going to be his foe, his
heel in this wrestling
match that is his presidency.
And so, I mean, that image,
that video is a pretty perfect
description of the way he
is approaching this.
Having that fight, having
that feud really excites
some people who support him.
Now, there are others who
are turned off by it and, you
know, we could go down the road
of the dangers of having
a video that looks
like it is encouraging
violence against members
of the media, but it works
for -- this is the same Donald
Trump who ran for president
and won.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How does
it advance his cause now?
STUART ROTHENBERG: Yes,
first of all, I think Tam
is exactly right on this.
I would just add two things.
One is, it advances his
cause by mobilizing and
motivating his base.
They love it when he
attacks the media.
They really think it's exciting
and they agree with him.
And I'm sure we will talk
about how the media is not
held in the highest regard.
Second of all, he enjoys it.
It's all -- look, let's
remember, Judy, he did that
in that wrestling show.
He actually did that.
It's his ego.
He wants to be the
center of attention.
focus of everything.
And I think he just has a
lot of fun when he does that.
And for Donald Trump, it's
more fun to do that than to
actually get into the weeds in
public policy.
TAMARA KEITH: And I was talking
to Republican consultant today
who was like, yes, it's a
distraction, but maybe it's a
welcome distraction, because if
the people are talking about his
tweets and talking about
WrestleMania, then they aren't
talking about Medicaid cuts.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, of course,
there's been the role of a
free press in a democracy, one
of the pillars of our form of
government in this country.
But we can -- we could talk
about that another time.
I do want to raise in our
last few minutes this new CNN
-- I'm sorry -- I had CNN on
the brain from the video -- the
new poll that the "NewsHour"
and NPR did in conjunction
with Marist, where, one of
the things we looked at, Stu,
exactly what you mentioned, high
distrust of the news media.
More than two-thirds of
Americans, they were asked,
what do you think about
trust in institutions?
And here it is.
Thirty-seven percent, a good
deal or a great amount of trust
in the Trump administration,
30 percent, even less, trust in
the news -- in the media, and
20, about on same par as trust
in Congress.
And you go on to see trust in
the intelligence community,
twice that much, 60 percent, and
in the courts, 60 percent.
But the bottom line here,
Stu, is that the media may
be a good whipping boy.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Yes, and I
think the public sees the media
as a political institution,
just as they see
the White House, the
president and Congress.
And, right now, nobody
trusts politicians or
people covering politicians.
It's a horrible trend.
I look back at the Gallup
numbers in the early
1970s, and those of us
in the media are regarded
much worse than
we were back then.
But it's been occurring over
the last couple of decades.
TAMARA KEITH: Republican
Senator Ben Sasse over the
weekend said something that goes
in conjunction with the tweets
and fits with these numbers too.
He said he was concerned
that the president was
trying to weaponize distrust.
And then here's the quote:
"We are at risk of getting to
a place where we don't have
a shared set of public facts.
The republic will not work if
we don't have shared facts."
These numbers are part of a
very long trend of institutions
losing trust from the American
people.
And that puts America at risk.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Very quickly,
in the last 30 seconds, I want
to show our audience and you
this -- the other
question in the poll.
Since President Trump
was elected, has the
overall tone and level
of civility in Washington
gotten worse?
Seventy percent.
Stayed the same, 20 improved, 6.
Stu, I guess no surprise here.
STUART ROTHENBERG: No.
Some people actually see
what they want to see.
Strong Republican -- 17
percent said that it improved.
And white evangelicals,
10 percent had --
they said improved.
But the overall sample
is very clear and, in
fact, very correct.
Things have deteriorated.
They're coarser.
They're more vulgar.
It's not a time of better tone.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we are
glad to promote civility
here at the "NewsHour."
Stu Rothenberg, Tamara
Keith, thank you both.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Thanks, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you
can find more about these
findings from our joint
"PBS NewsHour"/NPR/Marist
poll.
And that's on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
Next: bringing help to
developing countries for a
widely untreated birth defect.
Fred de Sam Lazaro has a
report from India's commercial
capital, Mumbai, on a condition
called club foot.
Its part of his ongoing
series Agents for Change.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: It
only sounds painful.
This wailing 5-year-old
is receiving the very
same treatment, a full
leg plaster cast, as
this young, perfectly
happy infant.
The therapy here in Mumbai's
Wadia Charitable Hospital will
save these children from a life
of pain and social isolation
that comes from club foot.
It's a common birth defect
that, in wealthy countries, is
usually corrected early in life.
But in the developing
world, it remains largely
untreated and becomes a
disability, says orthopedist
Dr. MDNMlaric Aroojis.
DR.
MDNMLARIC AROOJIS,
Orthopedist: It is
probably the second or
third important cause
of physical disability in
India, after road traffic
accidents and trauma.
It's more of a cosmetic
problem initially.
And as they grow older and
they can find that they can no
longer play with their friends,
that's when it starts
sinking in that this is a
functional problem as well.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Club foot
is congenital birth defect in
which a foot, in some cases
both feet, grow inward.
Patients learn to walk
on the side of the foot.
Twenty-six-year-old Madhu
Varma says it's painful for
sustained periods, but like most
sufferers, she's
learned to adapt.
What she could not deal with
was the sight of her daughter,
Madhuri, when she too was
born with club foot.
MADHU VARMA, Mother
(through translator):
It was really difficult.
I cried for days when
I saw my child's foot.
I could not eat.
I was just sick with worry.
But they told me that, with
plaster, they could treat it.
DR.
MDNMLARIC AROOJIS:
So this is the daughter
and this is the mother.
And the daughter's foot
is fully corrected.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO:
That correction once
required extensive
surgery, Dr. Aroojis says.
Now treatment in most cases
is a series of casts over
several weeks:, less invasive,
less expensive and less painful.
DR.
MDNMLARIC AROOJIS:
It's such a supple method.
We don't force the
foot in any way at all.
So, as you can see, that every
time we move the foot just
as much as the child allows.
This is a procedure which is
done without any anesthetic.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO:
Once corrected, patients
like 5-year-old Nishant
wear a brace attached
to an outward-facing
pair of shoes.
In a few months, as in
this case, it's only needed
at night and nap time.
Nishant shows no sign
of an abnormal gait.
His parents, struggling
slum dwellers, spent
hundreds of dollars at
ill-equipped and poorly
informed private clinics
with little success.
KETAN DHEPE, Father (through
translator): We had never
heard of club foot until he was
born.
We felt terrible, but when
we brought him to Mumbai, two
or three people told me that
Wadia Hospital has
the best treatment.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: That
treatment was developed
by an orthopedic surgeon
named Ignacio Ponseti
half-a-world away here in
Iowa and half-a-century ago.
It would take decades before the
Ponseti method became standard
practice for treating club
foot.
Why do you suppose it
took as long as it did?
CHESCA COLLOREDO-MANSFELD,
Business Consultant: One is that
the kinds of people that were
treating club foot, at
least in the U.S., were
orthopedic surgeons.
And I think they became
surgeons for a reason.
They like doing surgery.
And this was introducing
a nonsurgical technique.
And I think there was
some resistance to that.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Chesca
Colloredo-Mansfeld, a business
consultant, lived in Iowa city,
where Ponseti, a Spanish
immigrant, was a local legend.
CHESCA COLLOREDO-MANSFELD: Dr.
Ponseti's dying wish -- he was
in his 90s at that time -- was
to try to get his treatment
out to the rest of the world.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO:
Colloredo-Mansfeld started
one of several nonprofit
efforts to fulfill
Dr. Ponseti's wish to take the
nonsurgical approach, finally
standard in the U.S., to
developing countries.
She co-founded a charity
in 2010 called Miracle
Feet, supported mostly by
high net worth individuals
and foundations.
It's taken the Ponseti method
and message to clinics in 19
countries so far, with some
23,000 patients, including
those in Mumbai, providing
training and supplies at low or
no cost, including braces
patients will use after their
cast treatments are done.
In India, casting is done by
surgeons, but in countries
where they aren't available,
non-physicians are trained.
Another key role is that
of clinic assistants,
paid by Miracle Feet.
CHESCA COLLOREDO-MANSFELD: They
work to educate that family
during the bracing phase to make
sure that the children wear the
brace at night and complete the
treatment over the next four
years.
So, the correction itself only
takes two to three months,
but the follow-up period of
maintaining that correction
is absolutely critical.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO:
Veteran orthopedic surgeon
Rujuta Mehta says parents
of club foot patients,
once terrified at the prospect
and cost of surgery, are
elated when they discover it's
no longer needed.
DR.
RUJUTA MEHTA, Orthopedic
Surgeon: The acceptability,
therefore, of Ponseti is huge.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO:
Its much simpler, less
intimidating and it's cheaper?
DR.
RUJUTA MEHTA: Yes, absolutely.
Yes, it's cheaper.
And this is the kind of
thing you can apply in
a public health program.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The number
of children being treated has
tripled over the past decade
or so.
Yet five out of six club
foot patients go untreated in
developing countries like India,
still enduring an easily
correctable condition for
the rest of their lives.
So the challenge is to
get the word out early?
DR.
RUJUTA MEHTA: Absolutely, and
the more awareness there, the
earlier they come, the easier to
treat, the better the
deformity correction.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: A
deformity that is correctable
even in adulthood, as
Madhu Varma discovered
when getting her
daughter treated.
She became the oldest patient
this clinic has ever treated.
DR.
MDNMLARIC AROOJIS: There's
a very good possibility that,
just with serial castings
by the Ponseti method, we
should be able to get a
full correction in her.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: She had a
wedding to attend, she told the
doctors, where she and daughter
Madhuri would be able to dance.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
Fred de Sam Lazaro in Mumbai.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that
is something to celebrate.
Fred's reporting is a
partnership with the
Under-Told Stories
Project at the University
of St. Thomas in Minnesota.
In the wake of the 2016
election, many undocumented
immigrants across this
country have become
anxious and fearful of increased
immigration enforcement.
Tonight, the story about one
family in Milwaukee, Wisconsin,
where the children are American
citizens, but the
parents are not.
From Milwaukee
Public Television,
Portia Young reports.
PORTIA YOUNG: Every
morning, Lola Flores gets
her children ready for
school, and her husband,
Jose, plays with their
youngest daughter
before leaving for work.
But for Jose and Lola, ever
since the new presidential
administration took over, each
morning has become the start of
another day of living in fear,
fear that they may be separated
from their four children,
who are American citizens, by
U.S. Immigration and Customs
Enforcement agents,
due to increased
immigration enforcement.
LOLA FLORES, Undocumented
Immigrant: The more
important thing for my
family is that we stay
together.
I can't imagine a
separation with my littlest.
We live with fear every
day, and it's not easy.
JOSE FLORES, Undocumented
Immigrant (through translator):
If I get deported, I don't know
what will happen
with my children.
PORTIA YOUNG: Their 15-year
old daughter, Leslie, is
equally frightened her parents
may be arrested by
Immigration Customs
Enforcement agents, or ICE.
LESLIE FLORES, Daughter: I
am worried that there's been
rumors that there's been raids.
And I'm scared that, what
if they go to the store
and they get taken by ICE?
PORTIA YOUNG: The Flores family
says it is not just the risk
of deportation that scares
many of the families, but also
the negative attitude that
anti-immigrant supporters have
taken against undocumented
immigrants since President
Trump took office.
JOSE FLORES (through
translator): A person
came to me and said:
"Nice truck and nice
family, but get the hell
out of this country."
My son then turned around
to look at me and said:
"What happened, daddy?
Why is this person
telling us this?"
I told my son: "It's nothing.
Don't worry."
And then the man said:
"Get out of this country.
This is not your country.
We have a new president now
and his name is Donald Trump."
So this hurts me and breaks my
heart, not for me, but because
of the experience my little
boy went through.
PORTIA YOUNG: Jose and Lola have
lived in the U.S. for 20 years.
With the ongoing violence among
cartels, going back to Mexico,
their country of origin, they
say, would be very
difficult, if not deadly.
JOSE FLORES (through
translator): I cannot go
back to a country like this.
BRIAN WESTRATE, Republican
Leader: I don't know anyone
who wishes to take Mr. Flores
and his wife and deport
them, make their four
children parentless here
in the United States.
PORTIA YOUNG: Brian Westrate,
chairman of the Wisconsin 3rd
District Republican Party,
says the current laws for
legalization should be changed.
BRIAN WESTRATE: We need to
work together, and by we, the
American people, but through
our representatives, because,
again, they are the only
ones that can write law.
They are the only ones
who can change law.
We need to work together
to come up with a
pathway to legalization.
PORTIA YOUNG: Others believe
more security is needed.
DEANNA ALEXANDER, Milwaukee
County Supervisor: We
would be much better
off if we could welcome
as many immigrants who would
love to come here and to
support that American dream for
them.
PORTIA YOUNG: As a former member
of the Army National Guard,
Milwaukee County Supervisor
Deanna Alexander has been
on the front lines of
the U.S.-Mexico border.
And it's her experiences there
that have her calling for
increased law enforcement and
tougher security.
DEANNA ALEXANDER: Living
in a world with terrorism
and drug smuggling and
people who would do
Americans harm on purpose And
by choice or through their
own negligence, we have to be
conscientious of what that
means, and be careful of who
we allow to come in our door.
PORTIA YOUNG: Immigration
attorney Cain Oulahan,
who is giving legal advice
to the Flores family,
says a pathway to legalization
for undocumented immigrants
such as the Flores is not easy
to obtain.
CAIN OULAHAN, Immigration
Attorney: You can only really
get it if you have, For example,
a family member who is a
permanent resident or U.S.
citizen to apply for you.
And if you don't have that, it
is very difficult and oftentimes
impossible to get legal status
under our current laws.
PORTIA YOUNG: Under the current
immigration laws, the only
current solution for the Lola
and Jose to start a process
for legal status would be
through their children.
But for a U.S. citizen child
to petition for a parent, the
child must be at least 21 years
of age.
LESLIE FLORES: Well, it feels
good to know that there's a
point in my life that I can
help them like they
have helped me.
But it's hard to know that.
I'm 15 right now, and that's
until you are 21, I believe.
So it's a long to be waiting.
But we are going to try
our best to do that.
PORTIA YOUNG: Last summer,
the Flores family tracked down
their governor, Republican Scott
Walker, at a presidential
campaign event in
Iowa to confront him
about Deferred Action
for Parents of Americans
and Lawful Permanent
Residents, known as DAPA,
created under President
Obama.
LESLIE FLORES: Why
are you blocking DAPA?
GOV.
SCOTT WALKER (R),
Wisconsin: I'm the governor.
I don't have anything
to do with it right
now, but thanks, though.
LESLIE FLORES: I went that
time because I have seen, heard
and read about his politics
and his views.
And I don't agree with that.
And, well, that time,
I went because of my
family and my friends.
And I told him, why do you
want to deport my family?
Why are you against DAPA?
LESLIE FLORES:
Answer my question.
Why are you trying to
break my family apart?
GOV.
SCOTT WALKER: I want to spend 30
seconds answering you question.
For us, we are a nation of laws.
And, unfortunately, the
president last year,
after saying 22 times
before last year that
he couldn't make the law
himself, said he wasn't the
emperor, he's the president of
the United States, and he said
he couldn't change the law,
he decided to change the law,
even though the courts have
now said he can't do that.
My point is you have
got to follow the law,
follow the process.
I completely sympathize
with the situation you
are all in and others.
PORTIA YOUNG: GOP Party district
Chair Brian Westrate says
the Republicans must find a
way to incorporate immigrants.
BRIAN WESTRATE: And speaking
for the Republican Party, there
is a great deal of compassion
and acknowledgement that
our society is largely
better off with people
like the Flores family
in it than without it.
At the same time, we have to
find a pathway to legalization.
The solution cannot simply
be to just continue to let
them exist in the shadows.
PORTIA YOUNG: Milwaukee County
Supervisor Deanna Alexander
says her own parents were
immigrants, so she understands
people wanting to come to
the U.S. for a better life.
DEANNA ALEXANDER: But I also
understand that we have some
major problems, and it may not
be just at our southern border.
We have some major problems with
people who want to break our
laws or do our society great
harm that will come to
this country with any
opportunity they have.
PORTIA YOUNG: The message
Jose Flores would like to get
across: Immigrants are not bad
people.
JOSE FLORES (through
translator): We all
came here to work, and
I have behaved correctly
in this country.
I contribute to this country
and I try to do everything
the right way and stay out of
trouble.
I just don't have a Social
Security or a working
permit, but that is all.
Neither I nor my family are
criminals, and there are many
like me who are not criminals.
PORTIA YOUNG: It's a
message the Flores family
hopes will resonate with
lawmakers and around
the country.
For "PBS NewsHour," I'm Portia
Young in Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next: a new
take on a literary classic.
Jeffrey Brown has the
newest addition to the
"NewsHour" Bookshelf.
JEFFREY BROWN: A king
sacrifices his own daughter
to appease the gods.
His wife takes revenge
by killing her husband.
The story of King Agamemnon,
Queen Clytemnestra and
their children, set
against the backdrop
of the Trojan War, is
quite literally the
stuff of Greek tragedy.
And now comes a new telling in
"House of Names," a novel by
one of today's leading writers,
Colm Toibin.
His acclaimed books include
"The Master," "Nora Webster,"
and "Brooklyn," which was
made into a film in 2015.
Welcome to you.
COLM TOIBIN, Author, "House
of Names": Thank you.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, what is
this, a retelling, a rethinking?
What are you doing here?
COLM TOIBIN: Yes, it's a
retelling of the story.
And this is the great
story of war within a
family, of a family at war.
It's an intimate war.
So, as, for example, the war
in Syria is going on, if you
want some version of that as to
a sort of myth, a sense of
how -- what it looks like when
this happens intimately, rather
than, say, one country at war
with another, then I thought,
this is the great story, this
is the myth of origin
of all civil wars.
JEFFREY BROWN: But it is, as
you say, at heart, a family
drama, a family tragedy.
Does it feel -- I have read
others of your books that are
set in an Ireland that you
know or that you might have
lived -- that you have lived in.
Did it feel like these
characters were as alive
as you as those, others?
COLM TOIBIN: Yes.
Once you start working with
a family, you're working with
two sorts of feeling, which is
elemental love.
But if that goes wrong,
you get rage and hatred
on a new sort of level.
And I suppose I was
attempting to use a
contemporary novelist system.
I mean, it is set in ancient
Greece, but, psychologically,
trying to establish, why
would a woman
murder her husband?
She's not a psychopath.
But she's got very good
reasons to murder her husband.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
COLM TOIBIN: I mean, he's
behaved atrociously toward her.
But much harder for one
to imagine how would a
son murder his own mother.
And so I was -- yes, I became
absolutely involved, as though I
knew them, as though I could see
everything they did, working
in detail all the time with
each of them and their motives
and their shifting motives
and the rage they felt.
But they were also eating
together in the evening.
I mean, when Orestes comes
home, his mother, like any
mother, says, oh, my God, I hope
your bedroom is OK for you.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes, the little
details of everyday life.
COLM TOIBIN: Yes.
And his sisters hugging him,
but actually what they all
have in mind is, where are the
weapons?
What are they
eventually going to do?
JEFFREY BROWN: You told
this in alternating
voices, but especially
the voice, the woman's
voice, Clytemnestra, in a
first person, right, I, I, I?
COLM TOIBIN: Yes.
There's a late play by Euripides
called "Iphigenia in Aulis,"
which tells the story from her
point of view.
She was lured to the camp.
Her husband said there
was going to be a wedding.
But, in fact, they were going
to sacrifice her daughter.
So that I wanted to open it
with her, with her voice saying,
I have been acquainted with
the smell of death.
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: That's
literally the opening line.
COLM TOIBIN: Yes,
that's the opening line.
And it's meant to be -- it's
meant to describe how she took a
lover, so she could get someone
to help her.
And she planned everything down
-- so this is a novel, also,
besides about family, it's
about power.
And so anyone who is
ever seeking power should
read this book, because
it gives you a look
into how much planning you have
to do for that single moment.
If you get one thing wrong,
everything goes wrong.
And so she plans to kill
her husband when he returns
victorious from the Trojan War.
JEFFREY BROWN: From the
beginning in ancient times to
now, these stories are about the
cycle of violence, right?
And I know that in the plays
and in Greek times, they're
looking back at, how did it
all begin, right?
What led to one
death after another?
But it also raises the question
of how does it ever end, right?
COLM TOIBIN: Yes.
That with any civil
war -- for example, the
troubles in Northern
Ireland or what's happening
in Syria -- it begins
with one killing.
And then it's impossible to put
the genie back in the bottle.
It's retaliation
after retaliation.
So, the violence within a
civil war or violence with a
gang feud is always a spiral.
It's one and then it's five.
And then it's something
atrocious occurs further.
So to that extent, we're still
living in that idea of violence
not as a single act, but
as a cycle.
JEFFREY BROWN: You also have
in this, as in others of your
works, questions of morality,
questions of religion.
You have Queen Clytemnestra
saying that the gods
have gone, right?
But we're living in a new age.
COLM TOIBIN: It's very
hard to put the gods into
a contemporary novel.
So I had early on in the book
I had Clytemnestra as different
from the others, because she
doesn't pray to the gods
or appeal to the gods.
She has will.
She makes the decisions.
So what I wanted to do was move
it away from the godly into
the idea of it's people who
cause this, not the gods.
These killings are done by
people who decide to do them as
people, rather than having this
almighty power.
JEFFREY BROWN: Just ask you one
general question about writing,
because I saw where you said
once that a novel really begins
for you in a sentence, that
a sentence somehow -- and
this is the quote I
saw -- contains the
full weight of a novel.
That's an interesting idea.
COLM TOIBIN: Yes.
You have something on
one side of your head.
And I don't know if --
I'm not a brain surgeon,
but one side of your head
might store information
or an idea or a
memory or something.
And that moves of its
own accord into rhythm.
And you get a line, that
line, I have been acquainted
with the smell of death.
And once you get that,
you can then work.
Until you get it, you can't.
And so you wait for it.
But once it's there, there's no
point in waiting for it again.
You must work.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
Then the work comes of
actually writing the book.
Right?
COLM TOIBIN: Yes.
Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, the
new novel is "House of Names."
Colm Toibin, thank
you very much.
Thanks, Jeff.
Thank you very much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
now a story about the
founding of our nation.
A distant ancestor of Rohulamin
Quander was enslaved at George
Washington's Mount Vernon
estate in Virginia.
Quander is now a tour guide
there, where he offers a unique
perspective on the contributions
of African-Americans to
our country's history.
This story was filmed, edited
and produced by middle and
high school students who are
part of the "NewsHour"'s
Student Reporting Labs program.
ROHULAMIN QUANDER, Family
Historian: The past always
has an impact on the future.
Those who do not know
their past are kind of
destined to repeat it.
We have that program every year.
I have been coming
here all my life.
I remember when I was
like about 12 years old.
But I didn't fully understand
or appreciate the family's
longstanding connection.
We're going to go up to the
exhibit, Lives Bound Together:
Slavery at George Washington's
Mount Vernon.
I am a licensed tour guide
in the District of Columbia,
and I come and I bring groups
all over the metropolitan
Washington, D.C.,
including to George
Washington's Mount Vernon,
which the Quander family
has a longstanding
historical connection with.
SUSAN SCHOELWER, Co-Curator,
Mount Vernon: Nancy Carter
was a young girl, really, who
was 11 years old in 1799
when George Washington
made provisions in his
will to free his slaves.
Her mother, Suckey Bay was her
name, was an enslaved woman who
lived on one of Washington's
five farms and was a field hand.
So when Washington
freed his slaves, then
Nancy Carter was free.
She later married Charles
Quander, who was a member
of the Quander family.
And so there are many
descendants that come
down from that and are
part of the large Quander
family, which, as you
know, is one of the
oldest, if not the oldest,
documented African-American
family in the country.
ROHULAMIN QUANDER: The
family history goes back
into Maryland in the 1600s.
We hear about the Hamiltons and
the Madisons and the Jeffersons.
Well, do we hear about the
enslaved people who made sure
the crops were in, who made
sure the fishing was
proper, who made sure
the distillery was run?
They were the ones who were
the backbone, so that George
Washington could go off and
become the father of our nation.
SUSAN SCHOELWER: You
really can't understand
George Washington's life
without understanding
the lives of the people whose
lives were intertwined with his,
whose work supported his estate.
ROHULAMIN QUANDER: I
try to instill into
everyone the importance of
understanding where we as
Americans came from.
I often say this is not a
black history tour; this is
an American history tour.
WOMAN: I think, for me, it's
really -- it gives me a sense
of history to share with
my kids, and it's also really
neat to be able to participate
in this tour with Mr. Quander,
as he has relatives and
his ancestry line is
here at Mount Vernon.
SUSAN SCHOELWER: It's also, I
think, important to honor the
lives and the contributions of
the people who were enslaved
here and elsewhere whose stories
have not been told, have perhaps
not been remembered, have
not been appreciated.
ROHULAMIN QUANDER: We
are a bridge from the
past to the present.
And we have a responsibility
of upholding the Quander
name and lifting others as we
climb.
And it's important for
people to understand that
we have earned our rights.
We have built, literally
physically built Mount Vernon,
built the United States Capitol,
built the White House, along
with other people, of course.
But we need people in the
African-American diaspora to
understand that we have always
been a part of what
constitutes America.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Later tonight
on PBS, "POV" presents a film
about young Syrians who joined
the anti-government resistance.
"The War Show" follows
a tight-knit group of
Syrian idealists as
they protest against
the regime of Bashar al-Assad
and depicts the country's
descent into civil war.
"The War Show" airs tonight
on most PBS stations.
On the "NewsHour" all of next
week, an in-depth look inside
Vladimir Putin's Russia.
NARRATOR: In Russia today,
resurgent nationalism.
MAN: It's not artificial.
NARRATOR: Built by
and around one man.
MAN: Russians told pollsters
that suddenly they felt
like a superpower again.
NARRATOR: But for
Putin's opponents.
WOMAN: People who have tried
to leave the Putin family
voluntarily have not fared very
well.
NARRATOR: A rare look inside
Putin's Russia all next
week on the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's
the "NewsHour" for tonight.
On Tuesday, just in time
for tomorrow's Fourth
of July celebrations,
our ScienceScope team
reveals a breakthrough in beer
making, a secret ingredient
that is all the buzz.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again
right here tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you,
and we will see you soon.